Why in News 
Ahead of Meghalaya’s 50th Statehood Day celebration on 21st January, the Home Minister is expected to seal the final agreement to end the dispute in six areas of the Assam-Meghalaya boundary. 
Key Points 
3⁄4 About: 
	  Assam and Meghalaya share an 885-km-long border. As of now, there are 12 points of dispute along their borders.  
	  TheAssam-Meghalayaborderdisputearetheareas of Upper Tarabari, Gazang reserve forest, Hahim, Langpih, Borduar, Boklapara, Nongwah, Matamur, Khanapara-Pilangkata, Deshdemoreah Block I and Block II, Khanduli and Retacherra.  
	  Meghalaya was carved out of Assam under the Assam Reorganisation Act, 1971, a law that it challenged, leading to disputes.  3⁄4 Major Point of Contention:  
	  A major point of contention between Assam and Meghalaya is the district of Langpih in West Garo Hills bordering the Kamrup district of Assam.  
	  Langpih was part of the Kamrup district during the British colonial period but post-Independence, it became part of the Garo Hills and Meghalaya.  z Assam considers it to be part of the Mikir Hills in Assam.  
MeghalayahasquestionedBlocksIandIIofthe Mikir Hills -now Karbi Anglong region - being part of Assam. Meghalaya says these were parts of erstwhile United Khasi and Jaintia Hills districts. 
3⁄4 Efforts to Resolve Disputes: 
	  Both Assam and Meghalaya have constituted  border dispute settlement committees.  
	  It has been decided to set up two regional committees to resolve the border disputes in a phased manner and five aspects will be considered while resolving the border dispute.  z Theyarehistoricalfacts,ethnicity,administrative convenience, mood and sentiments of the people concerned and the contiguity of the land.  
	  Six sites are in consideration in the first phase. These are Tarabari, Gijang, Hahim, Baklapara, Khanapara-Pilingkata and Ratacherra.  
	  These disputed areas are part of Cachar, Kamrup Metro and Kamrup Rural on Assam’s side and West Khasi Hills, Ri Bhoi district and East Jaintia Hills on Meghalaya’s side.  3⁄4 Assam and Border Issues:  
	  The states of the Northeast were largely carved out of Assam, which has border disputes with several states.  
	  Assam’s border disputes with Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland are pending in the Supreme Court.  
	  Assam’sborderdisputeswithMizoramarecurrently in the phase of resolution through negotiations.  3⁄4 Other Border Disputes between Different States:  
	  Belagavi Border Dispute (between Karnataka and  Maharashtra)  
	  Odisha’s Border Disputes  
