Why in News 
The decades-old dispute between Karnataka and Maharashtra over the Belagavi or as Maharashtra likes to call it the Belgaum district, is back in the headlines. 
3⁄4 Belgaum or Belagavi is currently part of Karnataka but is claimed by Maharashtra. 
Reorganization of States in India 
3⁄4 Atthetimeofindependencein1947,Indiaconsisted of nearly 550 disjointed princely states. 
3⁄4 In 1950, the Constitution contained a four-fold classification of the states of the Indian Union—Part A, Part B, Part C and Part D States. 
	  Part-A states comprised nine erstwhile governor’s provinces of British India.  
	  Part-B states consisted of nine erstwhile princely states with legislatures.  
	  Part-C states consisted of the erstwhile chief commissioner’s province of British India and some of the erstwhile princely states.  
	  Part-D state comprised the Andaman and Nicobar Islands only.  3⁄4 The grouping of states at the time was done on the basis of political and historical considerations rather than on linguistic or cultural divisions, but this was a temporary arrangement.  3⁄4 Onaccountofthemultilingualnatureanddifferences that existed between various states, there was a need for the states to be reorganized on a permanent basis.  3⁄4 In this context, in 1948, SK Dhar committee - was appointed by the government to look into the need for the reorganization of states on a linguistic basis.   The Commission preferred reorganisation of states on the basis of administrative convenience including historical and geographical considerations instead of on linguistic lines.   This created much resentment and led to the appointment of another Linguistic Provinces Committee.  3⁄4 In December 1948, the JVP Committee comprising Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabh Bhai Patel and Pattabhi Sitaramayya was formed to study the issue.  The Committee, in its report submitted in April  1949, rejected the idea of reorganisation of states  
on a linguistic basis but said that the issue could be looked at afresh in the light of public demand. 
	3⁄4  However, due to protests, in October 1953, the Government of India created the first linguistic state, known as Andhra state, by separating the Telugu speaking areas from the Madras state.  
	3⁄4  On 22nd December 1953, Jawaharlal Nehru appointed a commission under Fazl Ali to consider the reorganisation of states.   The commission submitted its report in 1955 and it suggested that the whole country be divided into 16 states and three centrally administered areas.  
	3⁄4  The government, while not agreeing with the recommendations entirely, divided the country into 14 states and 6 union territories under the States Reorganisation Act that was passed in November 1956.  
	3⁄4  Even after the large-scale reorganization of the states in 1956, the political map of India underwent continuous changes due to the pressure of popular agitations and political conditions.  
	3⁄4  On 5th August 2019, President of India in the exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (1) of Article 370 of the Constitution had issued the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019.   This divided the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two new Union Territories (UTs): Jammu & Kashmir, and Ladakh.  
	3⁄4  Recently,DadraandNagarHaveliandDamanandDiu (Merger of Union Territories) Act, 2019 have merged the Union Territories (UTs) of Daman and Diu (D&D) and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (DNH).  
	3⁄4  Presently, India comprises 28 states and 8 union territories.  
