Why in News  Recently, a demand has been raised in Parliament to include the Union Territory (UT) of Ladakh in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution to safeguard land, employ- ment, and cultural identity of the local population.  
3⁄4 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 was introduced to bifurcate the State into two separate union territories of Jammu and Kashmir (with legislature), and Ladakh (without legislature).  
Sixth Schedule 
3⁄4 Article 244: The Sixth Schedule under Article 244 provides for the formation of autonomous administrative divisions — Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) — that have some legislative, judicial, and administrative autonomy within a state. 
 The Sixth Schedule contains special provisions for the administration of tribal areas in the four north-eastern states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. 
3⁄4 Autonomous Districts: The tribal areas in these four states have been constituted as autonomous districts. The governor is empowered to organise and re-organise the autonomous districts. 
	  The acts of Parliament or the state legislature do not apply to autonomous districts or apply with specified modifications and exceptions.  
	  The power of direction, in this regard, lies either with the President or Governor.  3⁄4 DistrictCouncil:Eachautonomousdistricthasadistrict council consisting of 30 members, of whom four are nominated by the Governor and the remaining 26 are elected on the basis of adult franchise.  
	  The elected members hold office for a term of five years (unless the council is dissolved earlier) and nominated members hold office during the pleasure of the governor.  
	  Each autonomous region also has a separate regional council.  3⁄4 Powers of the Council: The district and regional councils administer the areas under their jurisdiction.   They can make laws on certain specified matters like land, forests, canal water, shifting cultivation,  
village administration, the inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, social customs and so on. But all such laws require the assent of the Governor. 
	  They can constitute village councils or courts for trial of suits and cases between the tribes. They hear appeals from them. The jurisdiction of the high court over these suits and cases is specified by the governor.  
	  The district council can establish, construct or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, ferries, fisheries, roads and so on in the district.  
	  They are empowered to assess and collect land revenue and to impose certain specified taxes.  
