Why in News 
Recently, the Chief Minister of Manipur virtually launched the e-ILP platform for effective regulation of the Inner Line Permit (ILP) system in the state. 
3⁄4 The ILP system came into effect in Manipur on 1st January 2020. 
3⁄4 In Manipur, four types of permits are issued - temporary, regular, special and labour permits. 
Key Points 
3⁄4 Background of ILP System: 
 Under the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation Act, 1873, the British framed regulations restricting the entry and regulating the stay of outsiders in designated areas. 
 This was to protect the Crown’s own commercial interests by preventing “British subjects” (Indians) from trading within these regions. 
	  In 1950, the Indian government replaced “British subjects” with “Citizen of India”.  
	  Thiswastoaddresslocalconcernsaboutprotecting the interests of the indigenous people from outsiders belonging to other Indian states.  3⁄4 About:  
	  ILP is a document that Indian citizens from other states are required to possess in order to enter states like Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland and Manipur.  
	  It is issued by the concerned State Government and can be issued for travel purposes solely.  
	  Such states are exempted from provisions of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).  
z The CAA, which relaxes eligibility criteria for certain categories of migrants from three countries seeking Indian citizenship, exempts certain categories of areas, including those protected by the Inner Line system. 
3⁄4 Rules for Foreigners: 
 Foreigners need a Protected Area Permit (PAP) to visit tourist places which are different from ILPs needed by domestic tourists. 
z Under the Foreigners (Protected Areas) Order 1958, all areas falling between the ‘Inner Line’, as defined in the said order, and the International Border of the State have been declared as a Protected Area. 
z A foreign national is normally not allowed to visit a Protected/Restricted Area unless it is established to the satisfaction of the Government that there are extraordinary reasons to justify such a visit. 
